How can we use a mutation to create
update with Gatsby and GraphQL?
So, Gatsby does not support mutations.
That's another feature of making
it a build time only solution.
You don't mutate data through Gatsby.
What you can do and
we won't talk about this today, but
we'll get into it a little bit
with the intermediate course.
Is you can transform nodes which
is effectively a mutation.
But that's done through
Gatsby API's not through.
That's not handled through
like GraphQL itself.
So, again, GraphQL and
Gatsby is not GraphQL everywhere,
it is a very unique approach to GraphQL.
That is a more, it's almost a subset.
>> Is there a way to, sorry,
is there a way to get data like this
from a asynchronous source like a REST?
Or GraphQL server from some public API.
>> Yeah, absolutely, a little bit later
today, we will actually do that will
load data from a third party service
using their I believe their REST API.
And there are plugins from actually
loading in from REST API's.
And in the intermediate course we'll look
at putting custom data like whatever you
want into Gatsby's API's.
So, yeah, well we'll touch on it today,
we'll go much deeper in
the intermediate workshop though.
>> GraphQL is specifically
used with Gatsby,
is it compatible with
any other data layer?
>> So, yes, in the sense that you can load
any data into Gatsby's runtime GraphQL.
And also it's important to note
like you can use Gatsby without
ever touching the GraphQL layer,
like if you,
when we look at the MDX setup,
which is in a little bit here.
You can do everything in
Gatsby just using markdown, or
MDX and you never have to
write a GraphQL query at all.
And the site metadata stuff.
This is all optional.
The way that I'm doing it, I could also
create a config.js in my source folder.
And pull that in instead of
doing the the site metadata like
my config could just be you know import
meta from like metadata.js or something.
And then we could do metadata title here,
so you don't have to use the GraphQL.
And really, if I wanted to I could pull
in data from, using the fetch API or
from other sources to build out the site,
where Gatsby starts.
In this is sort of the thing where like,
if you find yourself really not wanting to
use Gatsby, or GraphQL, Gatsby might
not be the right solution for you.
There are other ways to build sites that
will let you do a lot of what Gatsby
does without the GraphQL requirement.
Next JS, Astro,
they're always that you can build sites
similar to this that don't
have GraphQL as a dependency.
So, there's, there are definitely options.
But yeah the the GraphQL part
is very integral to Gatsby, but
it's not a strict requirement.
It's just kinda one of those things that
your life gets easier if you just give in
and do it Gatsby's way.
>> How about if you have a bunch
of JSON data that you want to,
load into GraphQL and
then query through Gatsby's GraphQL layer.
Is there an easy way to do that?
>> Absolutely, there is a source
plugin for JSON specifically.
So, Gatsby source, JSON,
you can just pull that data straight in.
So, you you can just import it like this.
So, you can just pull it in,
but you can also source it.
And if you source it.
Where did it go?
Here, you can just get any JSON data that
comes in, and it'll turn it into nodes.
So, we'll look at how this
file system plugin works.
And then this, the transformers are what
I was talking about where you can
have data that comes into Gatsby.
A transformer plugin uses some Gatsby
API's to turn that data from one shape
into another.
So in this case it looks and
it finds that a file is a .JSON file and
then converts it into a GraphQL node.
So, if you have a bunch of JSON,
you don't actually have to do anything.
You just have to install
this Gatsby transformer and
it will put it into your
file like the GraphQL for
you, it'll show up as an option here.
>> Is there a way to query, or make these
queries on the fly like in JavaScript?
So, you could like for instance,
grab a bit of extra data dynamically,
like dynamic JS app and put it into
local storage, something like that.
>> Yeah 100%, if you wanna do that you've
now basically entered regular old react.
So, you would pull in the use effect and
you'd be able to do extra data would be,
just fetch whatever your endpoint was.
And then.
You could like, grab it like so.
And here, Would be your extra data.
Right?
So, at this point,
you could put it into a use state.
You could set it in local storage,
you could do whatever you want.
But you would be able to use for example,
you could take this title which is
loaded at build time and
use that to inform this fetch.
So, a good example of that would be if I
want to serve a render my blog posts, but
I don't want to serve a render the
comments I wanna client side render those.
Then I would be able to load the blog
post here and then I would be able to use
the ID of the blog post to make a call
to my API and load in the comments.
But again, you cannot call
the Gatsby GraphQL from the client side.
So this would be calling a third party
API or if you could put together,
a serverless function that
would return common data.
And then call your your
serverless function there.
There are a lot of ways that
you can solve this problem.
We will not be touching
on this flow today, but
we will in the intermediate
Gatsby workshop.
>> So the reason for me for learning
Gatsby is to create basically blogs and
content websites for
that feels snappy and fast, and
they work great on browser and mobile.
And they also performed great from
the technical SEO standpoint.
So, they rank better on
the search engines and all that.
And that's why I did some a little
bit of research on the internet.
So I found that Gatsby, basically two
things that came up Gatsby and next.
So, I'm not sure which worksheet,
which is better for this specific reason.
Also if you have some resources
regarding this specific reason, so.
>> So, Gatsby versus next is, I'm gonna
give you the most infuriating developer
answer ever, which is it depends, right?
So, Gatsby is a very opinionated
way to get data from a lot of
different sources and
put it into a unified data layer.
So that every page you build whether
you're pulling data from a headless CMS,
or from JSON, or from markdown.
Or from air table or
whatever you're using,
it's always going to feel roughly
the same to work with that data.
Next is a little bit of the other side.
Next is pretty, do whatever you want.
They provide you with some low
level API's to get site data.
So, they have like the get
static props hook, and
some other like extensions to the react
file type that allow you to load data.
Next is going to rely on you
building a lot more custom stuff.
A Gatsby is going to give you a lot of
batteries included, but it'll also fight
really hard when you wanna customise it,
because it's not the Gatsby way.
So, when you're looking at your use case,
what you're trying to build.
If what you have is structured data and
you wanna get it onto a website,
Gatsby is going to be really fast.
If what you have is some custom stuff and
you got to do some weirdness, and
you're looking at like you're not quite
sure how that date is gonna get in.
And some of its gonna load, now and
someone will load it client side,
and it's there's some like
bespoke stuff happening.
Next is gonna put less
roadblocks in your way.
But it'll also expect you to build
all of that stuff on your own.
So, these are the trade offs,
like next is more flexible at the expense
of having to write more code.
Gatsby is more expedient, I guess,
at the expense of having
a lot of opinions.